---
title: Foreword
---

Upon learning my life was "interesting", I found myself surprisingly unsurprised by the news. More salient than any feeling of shock at what I was hearing was an immediate certainty that the story I was living needed to be told. There was no question; this is the stuff good stories are *made of*. 

*The Primal Wound* quotes Harriet Mattigher:

> One of the most common fears is that of being abandoned. Abandonment is a dominant theme in child myths.

The trend of absent parents in fairy tales and Disney films was almost certainly not lost on my young subconscious mind. The common element shared among the stories I knew, as it turned out, was also true about me.

Judging by reactions of people I've told, it is at the very least an interesting story. I've tried, in almost every way imaginable, to package it for broader consumption. In more recent years, I began to wonder why I'd assigned myself such an arduous task."What makes it so urgently vital that I relive this experience? That I record it? That I share it?".

For a while I told myself it was a duty of sorts: that other people, having read the story, might then say things like *"I see the humanity in this."* or *"This has given me insight into my own life."* or, most hopefully: *"I will go forth and be a kinder person."*.

Such arguments for storytelling, compelling as they may have been, didn't seem to account for all or even most of my motivation. Even after dismissing the notion of "Good Damage", the need to share endured.

In various attempts to switch focus from reasoning to action, I concluded I would have to devise an ending before I knew the outcome. How could a story like mine end well, anyway? I would have to make it uplifting so as to be worth the difficult read. How could that even be possible?

*If I knew what an uplifting ending could look like, or indeed had any idea what I am moving towards, wouldn't my life be so very different?*

This unresolved question, paired with an always-worsening feeling like I was trying to convince myself to grab a hot iron skillet, I found myself trapped in indefinite creative gridlock.

Unsticking myself became ever more pressing in 2018 when my mortality paid a visit. Like so many bullies, it sent me sprawling on the floor before it with a violent shove from behind. The deadline (ha) was looming, and in a conundrum which easily dwarfed my worst post-college nightmares, I found myself understudied and dysfunctional with angst and injury. The situation was beyond hope: the most important (not parenting-related) project of my life (and that which represented most of my grade) was both imminently due and firmly wedged in the post-it-note phase of development.

In an ensuing, panic-fueled, chemo-intoxicated frenzy of grief and incapacity, I found myself paralyzed with overwhelm. Accepting that my various art projects would be left undone was among the heaviest truths to confront. Beyond the renewed hopelessness of finding an uplifting outcome to write towards, seeing the shape and color of Death as He crept towards me stole focus from the critically important work I needed to somehow cram into my remaining time.

Treatment forced me to accept the very real physical limiations of my body. At times I sprinted full speed into invisible barriers I'd never before encountered. People, mostly those who've never been through it, speak of cancer survival as though it grants us strength -- nothing could be further from reality. What it grants us, if anything, is access to a degree of respect and humilty that is difficult if not impossible to otherwise obtain.

Somewhat paradoxically empowered by a new awareness of my feelings, I began to take careful stock of my experience in the tenuous years since completing treatment. In doing so, I became more and more suspicious of the possibility that I was living in some kind of serious chronic pain. This represented a highly-consequential shift in perspective for me since, if it was true, it meant that I *always had been*. 

I knew many details of my backstory, yet for some reason I couldn't accept the stories as *having happened to me*. It was as though the person who had survived them ceased to exist when I was incarnated into their place. How could the events of someone else's early life be the source of my hurt? 

Nevertheless; the evidence of serious injury was definitely there, and my awareness of it was divided across or perhaps trapped between my conscious and subconscious mind. I could neither integrate / manage it at a core level, nor could I deploy it to usefully direct my choices.

A breakthrough occurred at the end of 2024 when I learned that my experience of injury is not (by far) unique among adopted individuals. Suddenly the details of my history integrated with a click so loud that I could swear the windows rattled:

*I've been looking for my mom since she left.*

That night my dreams told their own version:

> The light of a decades-awaited daybreak pierced the sky above the horizon and the ever-crashing waves of nausea sharply intensified. I saw myself standing upon the newly-illuminated landscape of my life. I blinked and found I was surrounded by the shrapnel of a thousand damaged connections. 

> My visibly abscessed core stood before me like a monument which had been secretly raised in the ancient shadows of pre-dawn. Its representative form was towering, bulging, and central to everything I observed. It appeared strained: painfully vascularized, greenish, and dangerously swollen with infection. To my blossoming horror as I watched, it heaved slightly as though with labored breath. 

> At its base was affixed a deeply-engraved granite placard. Reading the inscription, I became aware that I'd already known what it said:

> **She's Not Coming Back.**

> The words newly entered my mind like a curse being cast, and the sky split into a deafening crack of thunder. I recoiled from my senses and for a moment I staggered, distressed and confused, in a small circle. "No." I weakly protested my condition and directed every internal resource towards stabilizing myself over my feet. As if operating independently, my fingertips crawled down my torso searching for and grazing the handle of a needle-like sword I'd been given by a friend.

> My field of view was like that of someone piloting an aircraft and every warning light on the display briefly flickered. A subset stayed illuminated. A remote siren blared in the East. Waves of physical discomfort hit with ever increasing force and time itself seemed to stretch and twist. Without intent, I retreated deeper within my physical person -- perhaps to regroup? I pulled away from nerve endings and nociceptors - away from external sights and screaming warnings. I was diving deep into the dark water of my own person. Was I dying?

> Realizing that safety here was at best fleeting, I pivoted once more to align my fading vision through the tiny, distant windows of my eyes. The image of the central core swung into view under a flashing sky. Gathering the use of my limbs for a final, desperate, coarsely-timed, flailing burst of effort; I lunged at the towering abscess while extending my reach with the sharp end of the lance--

- - - 

Before reading Verrier's book, a lonely, angry, unsupervised toddler rampaged within me. She spent her waking hours smashing buttons and throwing switches. Over time she was granted all the agency and faculties of an adult human complete with unhindered access to a variety of available resources.

Any glancing mirage of that baby's missing mother was impetus to spend every resource we had (and many we didn't) on devastating shock-and-awe bids for acceptance. When these efforts failed, (as was nearly always the case), novelty was the preferred anesthetic for the journey back and forth across the darkened aftermath of relational disaster upon relational disaster.

> If one breaks a plate and glues it back together, although there should be a good “fit” because the same pieces are used, there is now glue separating the two parts. ... In the case of adoption, not only does the plate have to be glued back together, but the other half of the plate is different... the pieces will not quite fit... There is always a feeling of “not fitting.”

—*Verrier, The Primal Wound*

Most adoptees will agree there is a tendency among adoptive parents to center their own needs, experience, and fear - often to the point of entirely overlooking that of the child(ren) they claim to care for. The social narratives surrounding adoption heap endless praise on adoptive parents: the decision to raise a child they didn't create proves them to be certainly, incomprehensibly, unquestionably Good. Any complaint of mishandling on the part of the child is regarded as looking a gift horse in the teeth.

The message to the adopted child is not that they are receiving what is owed equally to every person born to humankind, but that they are the very fortunate recipients of charity in having their basic needs met before they have the agency and capacity to do it for themselves. Their feelings of gratitude should be an unwavering default: gratitude for a situation no one would ever choose for themselves -- Gratitude, perhaps, for not having been simply tossed in a dumpster. 

Far beyond driving many of us into cycles of dependency and learned-helplessness, these narratives are toxic to their root, and something very visible to adoptees is that no such feelings of gratitude are seen as acceptable to demand of biological children.

---

In my case, I lost my mother multiple times. Each time, I was explicitly and verbally denied the right to feel anything less than entirely neutral -- let alone to grieve. 

I was delivered this messaging in all manner of cruel language: I was explicitly told that the person who brought me to Earth wasn't my "real" mom, that she was "worthless" anyway; I shouldn't care about her, that my connection to her was unimportant and it shouldn't matter to me that I'd lost it, that the worst thing in the whole world that might happen to me would be turning out in any way to be like her, that I was ungrateful for feeling sad, and, perhaps most unbearably; that I was persecuting my beloved adoptive mother just by admitting that I was in pain.

I assumed that those guarding the site of my wound, telling me to search elsewhere for the source of my suffering, were ultimately well-meaning. I realize, looking back on my life, that I have a strange and self-harming tendency to assume good intentions of everyone I encounter regardless of their actual *behavior* and its impacts. 

More recently I've allowed myself to recognize the dismissiveness I experienced as a selfish and harmful form of cruelty: one that was perpetuated, perhaps in ignorance, against an already-injured *baby*. 

By placing my trust in the wisdom of my elders, I failed to consider that *I could grant myself permission* to honor my injury as valid. 

I never needed to wait until my life and soul were in tatters from trying and failing to repair my broken plate -- a condition made ever worse by ongoing attempts to fuse the half I was holding with every half-plate-shaped object I stumbled over. 

I didn't *have to* wait until the precarious years after I found myself death-adjacent in illness, when I discovered in a panic that I had lived my entire life never knowing a version of myself that wasn't in excruciating pain.

I didn't *have to* allow the infection of my core to persist into my fifth decade, seriously harming those closest to me and rendering me very nearly too weak and ill to treat it. 

My experience of chronic pain, and of being surrounded (and nearly suffocated) by chronic ignorance, is distressingly common among my demographic. The routine and devastating injuries of adoptees aren't openly discussed because ~~everyone who hasn't been adopted~~ most of us want to believe that adoption is an easy, tidy solution to a problem which is too painful to frankly and honestly acknowledege, let alone to live with as part of one's history.

--- 

It suppose I reasoned that if I turned the initial rejection into something tangible, I could then perhaps trade the value I'd generated for a few crumbs of durable evidence that I deserve to live after all (even though being here mostly serves to represent someone else's uniquely charitable behavior).

Perhaps my earnings could be inheritable wealth for my own children? Or, reaching; perhaps those who love and depend on me could find safety without having to grieve my death along the way?

There's a bittersweet gratitude to noticing now that I never made much progress towards sharing the story before getting conscious of the motives behind doing so and accepting that doing this work won't repair my broken plate. 

There is, in fact, no person on Earth to appeal to, and no cosmic entity in the universe that can or will reecognize my mother's ghost in my prose and be moved to restart time or reverse entropy.

The story is what I was handed in exchange for wholeness -- in a trade I never consented to make. Nothing less than wholeness restored (plus interest) represents an acceptable trade going forward. Such trades are impossible, therefore the story as an artifact is priceless. It is me: it is inextricable from the person I've become. I tell it by living, and there are traces of it on all that I touch.

---

In my most recent decade, I've taken to caring for and preserving old furnishings and decorative objects. I was taught by the tradesmen of my life to avoid unnecessary intervention for these items whenever possible, but sometimes the things I find need a bit more than routine maintenance to stay whole or useful. 

Like my stories, they are pulled from rubble and arranged by hands which have spent a lifetime recovering beauty from that which is undervalued, overlooked, and discarded. I now recognize this practice as the Art which I honor and live. It is my sacred duty, and it no longer feels urgent or necessary to provide justification for doing my work.

If and when I choose to make gifts of my Self by sharing, I can do so lightly. I have no needs or expectations of the recipient(s), though of course I hope very much that they are left in better condition for having taken a brief glimpse at life through my perspective, should they choose to do it.

It would seem self-acceptance has arrived with the dawn. It is a bit like a new wool sweater: I often find it uncomfortable or undesirable to wear, yet it seems to be entirely adequate for staying warm regardless of the weather. Having it in my toolkit now, I am given to realize that I don't actually *owe* my story, or any other part of me, to anyone. 

The truth of this point stands of course with a few notable exceptions. Namely; there are three people for whom the story is already written into their blood.

For better or worse, this history belongs to me. 

Through me, it belongs to them.

---

> We cannot change anything until we first accept it.

*— Jung*
